{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Poor Richard;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Franklin Gothic Medium;}{\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green176\blue80;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.17134}{\*\mmathPr\mdispDef1\mwrapIndent1440 }\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\kerning28\b\f0\fs40\par
\par
\par
\par
\fs48 Mariemont Community Church Extended Care \par
\par
Parent Handbook\par
\fs40\par
2018-2019\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\f1\fs36 A place where it is easy for little children to know and love Jesus\par
\f0\fs40\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\fs28 3908 Plainville Rd\par
Cincinnati, Ohio 45227\par
(513) 504-9287\par
preschool@mariemontchurch.org \par
\par
\par
\ul\fs40\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
ADMINISTRATION\ulnone :\par
\par
\par
\ul\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ulnone\fs36  Mark Simmes\tab\tab                Preschool Elder\par
 Renee Brownfield\tab\tab                Preschool Director\par
\par
\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\par
\par
\par
\ul\par
\par
EXTENDED CARE STAFF\ulnone :\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\par
Leanne Riffle\tab                          Coordinator                          \par
Renee Brownfield                   Kindergarten-1st grade\par
\fs40 Amanda Conners             2nd-6th grade\par
Nancy Schmidt                 2nd-6th grade\par
                            \par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\fs36\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\tx7200\ul\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx7200\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\tx7200\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\fs44 MORNING SESSION\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\tx7200\fs36\par
KINDERGARTEN-6TH GRADE\par
 CLASS INFORMATION\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx7200\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ulnone\fs28\par
\par
\fs36 Teacher: Amanda Conners\par
Teacher: Julie Curran\par
Ratio:  2 Staff/ 18 Children\par
Days:  Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday\par
Time: 7:00am to 8:15am\par
Total Tuition: $5/day\par
\fs28\par
\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\ul\fs36 KINDERGARTEN-SIXTH GRADE SCHEDULE\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ulnone\fs28\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qj\fs36\par

\pard\nowidctlpar 7:00am-8:00am                          Class Room Centers\par
\par
8:00am-8:10am\tab\tab\tab     Daily Devotional \par
\par
8:10am-8:15am                          Walk Children To School\par
\fs28\par
\ul\fs36\par
\par
\ulnone\fs28\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qj\fs36\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\tx7200\fs44 AFTERNOON SESSION\fs36\par
\par
\ul\par
KINDERGARTEN-1ST GRADE\par
 CLASS INFORMATION\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx7200\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ulnone\fs28\par
\par
\fs36 Teacher: Leanne Riffle\par
Teacher: Renee Brownfield\par
Ratio:  2 Staff/ 18 Children\par
Days:  Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday\par
Time: 3:20pm to 6:00pm\par
Total Tuition: $12/day\par
\fs28\par
\par
\par
\par
\ul\fs36\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc KINDERGARTEN-1ST GRADE SCHEDULE\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ulnone\fs28\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qj\fs36\par

\pard\nowidctlpar 3:30pm-3:45pm                          Snack Time\par
\par
3:45pm-4:00pm\tab\tab\tab     Daily Devotional \par
\par
4:00pm-4:30pm                         Muscle Room Play/\par
                                                    Homework\par
\par
4:30pm-5:30pm                         Outdoor Play\par
\par
5:30pm-6:00pm                         Class Room Centers\par
\par
\par
\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx7200\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\tx7200\ul 2ND-6TH GRADE CLASS INFORMATION\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx7200\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ulnone\fs28\par
\par
\fs36 Teachers: Amanda Conners\par
Teacher: Nancy Schmidt\par
Ratio:  2 Staff/ 18 Children\par
Days:  Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday\par
Time: 3:20pm to 6:00pm\par
Total Tuition: $12/day\par
\fs28\par
\par
\par
\par
\ul\fs36\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc 2ND-6TH GRADE SCHEDULE\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ulnone\fs28\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qj\fs36\par

\pard\nowidctlpar 3:30pm-3:45pm                          Daily Devotional\par
\par
3:45pm-4:00pm\tab\tab\tab     Snack Time \par
\par
4:00pm-4:30pm                         Class Room Centers\par
                                                 \par
4:30pm-5:30pm                         Outdoor Play\par
\par
5:30pm-6:00pm                         Game Room\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx7200\par
\par
\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\par
\fs28\par
\ul\fs36\par
\ulnone\fs28\par
\fs36\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\par
\ul\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fs32\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\qc\ulnone\fs36\par
\ul\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ulnone EXTENDED CARE\cf1   POLICIES\par
\cf2\fs24\par
\cf1\ul PHILOSOPHY\ulnone :\ul\par
\par
\ulnone The Mariemont Community Church Extended Care is a Christian school.  We include basic Christian truths with basic educational skills in the preparation of our Extended care children for their formal education.\par
The Extended Care is an outreach ministry of the church, which states the following purposes in its charter:\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\li300\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li660\tx660 1.\tab To operate the extended care; serve sacrificially on Christ\rquote s behalf toward extended care children and their families from Mariemont and neighboring communities.\par
2.\tab To demonstrate the love of Christ in the way faculty and staff work together and the way they serve the extended care\rquote s children and families.\par
3.\tab To operate in a way that demonstrates excellence and wholeheartedness befitting followers of Christ.\par
4.\tab To be a light of Christ to extended care children and their families.  As a result of connection with the extended care, children and family members will be drawn closer to Christ.\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\par
Additionally, the goal of the Mariemont Community Church Extended Care is to promote intellectual, physical, social, emotional, and spiritual growth of our students by: \par

\pard\nowidctlpar\li300\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li660\tx660 1.\tab Providing a school with a planned environment and curriculum, where learning takes place in a nurturing atmosphere.        \par

\pard 
{\pntext\f0 2.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf0\pnindent60\pnstart2\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li660\tx660   Encouraging each child in self-discovery, furthering their understanding of his/her value to the family and community.\par
{\pntext\f0 3.\tab}  Preparing each student for further education by allowing the individual child to develop at his/her own pace through sensory experiences, exploration and creative activities.\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li660\tx660 4.\tab Relating simple Christian truths, principles and values to the lives of extended care children.\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\par
\ul\par
HOURS OF OPERATION:\par
\ulnone\par
The Mariemont Community Church Extended Care is in operations from 7:00am to 8:15am and 3:20pm to 6:00pm.  Director\rquote s hours of availability are 7:30am-4:30pm.\par
\par
\par
\ul PROVISION OF INFORMATUION, POLICIES AND PRECEDURES LICENSEED CHILD CARE CENTERS\par
\par
\ulnone      1.  The extended care license is issued by the Ohio Department of Job and  \par
          Family Services and is located on the bulletin board located in the preschool \par
          office.\par
     2.  A toll free number is listed on the license for reporting suspected violation of   \par
          chapter  5104 of the Revised code or Chapter 5101:2-12 of the Administrative \par
          code.  A copy of the law and rules are available at the center for review upon  \par
          request.\par
     3.  The administrator and staff are required under section 2151.421 of the Revised \par
          code to report their suspicions of child abuse or neglect to the public children \par
          services a agency.\par
    4.  Parents/guardians are premitted unlimited access to the center during hours of \par
         operation  for the purposes of contacting their children or evaluation the care of \par
         the premises.  Upon entering the center, the parent/guardian must notify the \par
         administrator.\par
    5.   Parent rosters that include names and telephone numbers of parents of enrolled   \par
         children are available upon request.  Parents will be notified that the rosters do \par
         not  include the names or telephone number of those parents who requested not \par
         to be included.\par
    6. Licensing inspection reports and substantiated complaint investigation reports for \par
        the current licensing period are located on the bulletin board in the preschool \par
        office.  \par
    7.  The center\rquote s licensing record, including licensing inspection reports, complaint \par
         investigations, evaluation forms from the health, building and fire departments  \par
        that  inspect the center, are available upon request from the Ohio Department of \par
        Job and  Family Services.\par
    8.  It is unlawful for the center to discriminate in the enrollment of children upon the \par
        basis  of race color, religion, sex, or national origin or disability in violation of the  \par
        Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 104 Stat; 327, 42, U.S.C. 12101 et seq.\par
\par
For more information about child care licensing requirements as well as how to apply for child care assistance, Medicaid health screenings and early intervetion services for your child, please visit http/jfs.ohio.gov/cdc/families.stm\par
\ul\par
\par
\ulnone\f2\par
\par
\ul\f0 TUITION PAYMENT SCHEDULE/LATE PAYMENT POLICY\par
\par
\ulnone Extended care tuition is broken down into nine monthly payments.  Parents will receive a bill via email at the beginning of each month.  It will post the current tuition owed.Monthly tuition must be paid by the end of each month.  If the extended care does not receive a payment after 30 days, a reminder will be emailed to the parents.  If the preschool does not receive a payment after 45 days, the child\rquote s registration will be terminated.  \par
\par
\ul\par
MANDATORY ENROLLMENT FORMS\ulnone :\par
\par
There are four forms that are mandatory for parents to fill out before their child/children may enroll in the program.\par

\pard 
{\pntext\f0 1.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf0\pnindent0\pnstart1\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li750 The Child Enrollment and Health Information Form.\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li720 2..\tab  Release Waiver \par
3.    Routine Field Trip\par
4.    Weekly schedule form\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\par
\ul\par
PICK-UP AND DROP-OFF PROCEDURE\ulnone :\par
\ul\par
\ulnone Mariemont Community Church Extended care follows a very specific procedure for parents when picking-up and dropping-off their child. (If your child/children will be absent from school, please call the director to let the school know.)  If your child/children will be attending school, then please follow the sequence listed follow:\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li720\tx720 1.\tab When dropping off and picking up, parents must park in the designated parking areas.  Parents are not to park in areas marked \ldblquote NO PARKING.\rdblquote  or in areas that are not designed to be a parking area.    \par
2.\tab Entry to the extended care program is through the front entrance and controlled by a security keypad.  The door will remain locked at all times, and will require your security code to access the building.  \par
3.   The center opens at 7am.  Parents walk their child/children into the extended care room.  Then at 8:15am, the staff walk the children to school\par
4.\tab At 3:20pm, children are dismissed from Elementary School.   Kindergarten and First graders meet our staff in the hallway right outside of the Kindergarten class rooms.  Second through Sixth graders meet our staff in the Library.\par
5.\tab Staff members are then in charge of the child\rquote s safety.   Staff members will record the time of drop off on the attendance sheet when the child arrives, and also when the child is picked up by the parent/guardian.  The child will remain in the care of a staff member until released to parent, guardian or approved person.\par
.\tab\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\li360 *Please note that all parents receive a release form in their orientation materials and must list any approved persons for pick-up purposes.  Please notify the child\rquote s teacher ahead of time if an approved person will be picking up your child.  If a custody agreement is in effect for your child/children.  The parent/guardian must give a copy of the custody agreement to the Director upon enrollment of their child to allow the staff to follow the schedule stated on the agreement.\ul\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ulnone\par
\ul\par
\par
LATE FEE POLICY\ulnone :\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\li360\par

\pard\nowidctlpar The Extended care program  end at 6:00pm a.m.  A late fee will be assessed to parents who are late picking up their child.  Listed are the procedures the preschool will follow:\par
      1.\tab The first time the parent is late a verbal warning will be given.  \par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li720\tx720 2.\tab The second time the parent is late a written warning will be given. \par
3.\tab The third time, and for any incidences after that, the parent will be charged five dollars for every ten minutes he/she is late.         \par

\pard\nowidctlpar\par
We understand that unavoidable or emergency situations will occur throughout the year that may cause parents to be late.  Therefore, the director will assess emergency situations on a case-by-case basis in determining late-fee assessment.\par
\ul\par
\par
CONFLICT RESOLUTION:\ulnone\par
\par
If parents have concerns with his/her child\rquote s teacher, we ask that the following procedures be enforced.  If a parent has a concern with the director, they should start with step two of the conflict procedure:\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li600\tx600 1.\tab Discuss with child\rquote s teacher first.  If the parent feels that the issue was not properly addressed, or it was dismissed, then:\par
2.\tab Discuss with the director.  The director will then work with the staff member and parents in an attempt to resolve the problem.  If the parent feels that the conflict is unresolved, then:\par
3.\tab Discuss with the Mariemont Community Church Elder responsible for the Extended care program.\par
4.\tab Once exhausted, the above steps are final.  Refusal of the preschool\rquote s resolution will result in the permanent disenrollment of the child.  \par
5.\tab If employees have concerns, speak to the administrator or the Mariemont Community Church Elder \par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ul\par
\par
DAILY DEVOTIONAL\par
\par
\ulnone The Extended care program has a daily devotional with the children.  The devotional materials comes from stories that we ready from a children's Bible. \par
\par
\par
\ul\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx1080 SNACKS\ulnone :  \par

\pard\nowidctlpar\par
The Extended care program offers daily snacks to the children. The snack must offer two of the four food groups.  \par
\ul\par
\ulnone\par
\ul NUT FREE FACILITY POLICY\ulnone : \par
\par
Mariemont Community Church Extended Care Programl is a \ldblquote Nut\rdblquote  free facility.  This means that the following items, and/or foods containing the following items are not permitted anywhere on the school premises.\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li1380 a.\tab Peanuts;\par
b.\tab Tree nuts (For example, Cashews, Walnuts, Almonds, Macadamia etc.)\ul\par
\ulnone c.\tab Peanut butter (For example, sandwiches, candy containing peanut butter, peanut butter crackers, peanut butter granola bars and peanut butter cereal etc.);\ul\par
\ulnone d.\tab Baked goods containing nuts and any form of nuts \ul\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ulnone\par
\ul Therefore, parents must read all ingredient statements on food and baking ingredient packaging BEFORE bringing anything into the classroom.  Please ensure there are no nuts in the ingredient statement.  Please ask your child\rquote s teacher or the director should you need assistance in reading ingredient statements\ulnone .  This applies to anything brought into the school, such as:  snacks, birthday and holiday treats, special event treats (for example, Valentine\rquote s Day) and bake sales etc.  \par
\par
\par
\ul\par
\par
SPECIAL NUTRIONAL NEEDS AND FOOD ALLERGIES\ulnone :  \par
\par
For children with special nutritional needs or food allergies, we requires that parents complete the  \ul Child Medical/Physical Care Plan Form\ulnone .  This form helps the preschool staff to ensure that children are protected from contact with problem foods.  At the beginning of the school year, parents of a child with any food allergies should notify their child\rquote s teacher to discuss any special snack arrangements.  Teachers will provide necessary communication to all parents in the class regarding daily snacks, birthday, holiday and special event treats.\par
\ul\par
\par
\par
SUPERVISION OF CHILDREN\par
\ulnone When children are present in our center, the staff will:\par
    -Leave no child unsupervised which means the staff know the child's needs,  \par
     awareness of and responsibility for the activity of each child and being near enough  \par
     to respoind and reach children immediately including responding to the chil's basic \par
     needs and protecting them from harm.\par
    -Ensure all children are within sight and hearing of staff members at all times \par
     (except when children are using the restrooms.  At that time, staff will ensure that \par
     they can hear the children.)\par
    -Not be under the influence of any substance that impairs the staff member's ability \par
      to surervise children and/or perform duties\par
    -Always have immediate access to a working cell phone\par
    -Only release a child to the parent or approved guardian\par
    -Not expose children to inappropriate languard or media\par
    -Supervise outdoor and  muscle room by remaining  with the \par
     children at all time.\par
    -When given written permssion from the parents, the children make leave the center  \par
     and walk home, walk to another destination and/or participate in activities inside the \par
     building that are sponsored by another group. \par
    -Written permision shall state child's name, location of the activity, arrangements of \par
     going to and from activity, start and end time of the activity, time period for when \par
     permission is given, parent's signature and date. \par
\par
\par
\par
\ul\par
\par
GUIDANCE AND MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES\ulnone :\par
\ul\par
\ulnone All employees of the extended care will adhere to the specifications of rule 2-12-22 in the Child Care Licensing Center rules.  Child guidance and management measures must be developmentally appropriate for the child, shall be consistent, and shall be explained to the child.\par
\par

\pard\keepn\nowidctlpar\cf0\kerning0 The following techniques or practices may be used by Staff.  Any technique or practice used shall be developmentally appropriate, consistent and shall occur at the time of the incident.\par
-Setting clear limits\par
-Redirecting to an appropriate activity\par
-Showing positive alternatives\par
-Modeling the desired behavior\par
-Reinforcing appropriate behavior\par
-encouraging children to control their own behavior, cooperate with others and solve problems by talking\par
-Separation from the situation, shall last no more than one minute per each year of the child\rquote s age.  Upon the child\rquote s return to the activity, the provider shall review the reason for the separation and discuss the expected behavior with the child\par
-Holding a child for a short period of time, such as a protective hug, so that the child may regain self-control\par
\par
The following are prohibited discipline techniques\par
-Abuse, endanger, or neglect of a child, including shaking\par
-Utilize cruel, harsh, unusual, or extreme techniques\par
-Utilize any form of corporal punishment\par
-Delegate children to manage or disciple other children\par
-Use physical restraints on a child\par
-Restrain a child by any means other than holding child for a short period of time, \par
-Place a child in a locked room or confine child in any enclosed area\par
-Confine child to equipment such as cribs or high charis\par
-Humiliate, threaten or frighten children\par
-Subject children to profane language or verbal abuse\par
-Make derogatory or sarcastic remarks about children or their families\par
-Punish children for failure to eat or sleep or for toileting accidents\par
-Withhold any food beverages or water, rest or toilet use\par
-Punish an entire group of children due to the unacceptable behavior of one\par
-Isolate and restrict children from any or all activities for an extended period of time.\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\cf1\kerning28\par
\par
 Also, all staff members will seek to cultivate self-discipline and socially-acceptable behavior in each child.  At the beginning of the year, simple, important rules and limits will be implemented, designed to protect the child and the group.  Staff will be positive and focus on \ldblquote do\rquote s\rdblquote  rather than \ldblquote do not\rquote s\rdblquote  when redirecting inappropriate behavior and use constant praise when the child engages in appropriate behavior.  When there is a discipline problem in the classroom, the following procedures will be observed:\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li720\tx720 1.\tab The child will first be given a verbal warning and reminded of the specific rule he/she has disobeyed.  \par
2.\tab If the negative behavior continues after a warning, then the child will be placed in a chair for \ldblquote time out\rdblquote  and again reminded of the specific rule.  \par
3.\tab If \ldblquote time out\rdblquote  fails to correct the behavior, the child will be removed from the classroom to sit in the preschool office with the director, who will again talk to the child.\par
4.\tab If the problem continues, the director will contact the parents, inform them of the situation, and request that they pick up the child immediately.\par
5.\tab If the child continues to act in a negative behavior on a regular or frequent basis, then the director will have a meeting with the parents to create a disciplinary plan specifically tailored for the child. \par
6.\tab If a child still chooses to misbehave following the disciplinary plan implementation, he/she may be removed from participation in the program by a joint decision of the director and the preschool elder.\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\li480\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ul\par
MANAGEMENT OF ILLNESS POLICIES\ulnone :\par
\ul\par

\pard\keepn\nowidctlpar\cf0\kerning0\ulnone All Staff members are required to take six hours of communicable disease training.  This training helps Staff members to avoid and manage the spread of disease. If a communicable disease is found, the director will notify the entire class within four hours.\par
\par
Management of Illness\par
A. If a child has any of the following symptoms, the staff member is to bring the child to the preschool office immediately.  The director will then call the parent and supervise the child until the parent comes to pick up the child.\par
-Temperature of at least 100 degrees Fahrenheit when in combination with any other sign or symptom of illness\par
-Diarrhea (two times)\par
-Severe coughing, causing the child to become red or blue in the face or to make a whooping sound\par
-Difficult or rapid breathing\par
-Yellowish skin or eyes\par
-Redness of the eye or eyelid, thick pus eye discharge, matted eyelashes, burning, itching or eye pain\par
-Untreated infected skin patches, unusual spots or rashes\par
-Unusually dark urine and or gray or white stool\par
-Stiff neck with elevated temperature\par
-Evidence of untreated lice, scabies, or other parasitic infestations\par
-Sore throat or difficulty in swallowing\par
-Vomiting more than one time or when accompanied by any other sign or symptom of illness\par
\par
*\cf1\kerning28  If your child\rquote s temperature is 100.0 degrees F or greater (or 1 or 2 degrees above the child\rquote s normal temperature) (s)he should remain home until (s)he has been fever free for 24 hours without the use of fever reducer medication (acetaminophen \endash  i.e. Tylenol or ibuprofen \endash  i.e. Advil or Motrin). Remember fever is a symptom indicating the presence of an illness.  Also, if your child has vomitted, (s)he may not return to preschool until 24 hours have past.\cf0\kerning0\par
\par
B Staff shall wash hands with liquid soap and running water for at least 15 seconds\par
-Upon arrival for the day, after breaks, when moving from one child care group to another and upon returning from outside\par
-After toileting or assisting a child with toileting\par
-After each diaper change or pull-up change\par
- After contact with bodily fluids or cleaning up spills or objects contaminated with  \par
  bodily fluids\par
 -After taking off disposable gloves\par
 -After cleaning or sanitizing or using any chemical products\par
 -After handling pets, pet cages, or other pet objects that have come in contact with the  \par
   pet\par
  -Before eating, serving or preparing food or bottles for feeding a child\par
  -Before and after completing a medical procedure or administering medication\par
\par
Proper hand washing procedure\par
  -Use liquid soap and running water\par
  -Rub hands vigorously for at least 10 seconds, including back of hands, wrist and  \par
    between fingers, and under fingernails, rinse well\par
   -Dry hands with a paper towel\par
   -Use paper towel to turn off running water when finished with hand washing\par
\par
Make sure children in the class room wash their hands \par
    -Upon arrival for the day\par
    -When visible soiled\par
     -After toileting/diaper change\par
     -After contact with bodily fluids\par
     -After returning from outdoor play\par
     -After handling pets, pet cages or other pet objects that have come in contact  \par
      with the pet before moving on to another activity\par
     -Before eating or assisting with food preparation\par
     -After water activities \par

\pard\nowidctlpar\cf1\kerning28\b0        \par
\b   \par
\par
\par
\ul PREVENTATIVE MEASURES\ulnone :\par
\par
In the event that the staff or director identify symptoms of illness, the following plan of action will immediately go into effect:\ul\par
\ulnone\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li720\tx720 1.\tab Identify the symptoms. \par
2.\tab Isolate the child in the director\rquote s office until parent or guardian arrives.\par
3.\tab Keep the child within sight and hearing of classroom.\par
4.\tab Provide a cot and make him/her feel as comfortable as possible.\par
5.\tab Call the child\rquote s parents or adults listed on the child\rquote s emergency transportation form in order to have the child removed from the center.\par
6.\tab Disinfect the classroom and cot.\par
7.\tab Only allow readmission of child upon receiving a doctor\rquote s note when dealing with communicable diseases.  A list of Communicable diseases is posted by the preschool office.\par
8.   Send parents an email stating that their child has been exposed to a communicable disease.\par
\par
\par
\ul ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION\ulnone : \par

\pard\nowidctlpar\par
*It is our policy to only administer medications for medical/emergency cases. Parents and their child\rquote s physician are instructed to fill out the form entitled,  \ldblquote\ul Parent/Guardian request for administration of medication\ulnone ,\rdblquote  if their child is in need of medication while the child is present during the preschool\rquote s hours of operation.  Staff will follow specific instructions that are listed on the form when administrating medication to the child.  This policy also applies to all children who attend the preschool. \par
*It is our policy to only administer medications for medical/emergency cases.\par
\ul\par
\par
MEDICAL/PHYSICAL CARE PLAN\ulnone :\par
\par
Parents who have children in need of additional care for medical or physical treatment should fill out the form titled \ldblquote Child Medical/Physical Care Plan.\rdblquote   The staff will have this form readily available in the child\rquote s file, located in the classroom. The staff will then be aware of the following:\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\li360\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li720\tx720 1.\tab Symptoms to look for\par
2.\tab Conditions to avoid\par
3.\tab Medical procedures to follow\par
4.\tab Medicine to administer\par
5.\tab Training instruction in the case of non-emergencies or emergencies\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\ul\par
\par
\par
OUTDOOR/INDOOR PLAYGROUND POLICIES\ulnone :\ul\par
\ulnone\b0\par
\b Mariemont Community Church Extended care will provide children with outside play time as much as possible. The staff will be taking their class outside during cooler temperatures, EVEN ON SNOWY DAYS!   Please remember to bring appropriate clothing. (i.e., sweaters, sweat shirts, jackets, coats, hats and gloves).  \par
\par
\ul PLAYGROUND SAFETY\ulnone :\par
\ul\par
\ulnone To ensure safety for the children while playing on the playground, the director and the staff will adhere to the following policies:\par
\par
The director will:\par
    1. Ensure that 65 square feet of space is provided for each child and will conduct \par
        four \par
    2. Ensure that the padding will meet the required amount needed for    \par
        ensuring safety in the event a child should fall from a climbing structure,  \par
    3. Ensure that the playground equipment is free from rust, cracks, holes, \par
        splinters ,sharp points or edges, chipped or peeling paint, toxic substances    \par
        protruding bolts, or tripping hazards.\par
    4. Ensure that the area provides proper shading for the children, is well defined by a   \par
       fence that is safe and in good repair and  ensure that the gate has functional \par
       latches which cannot be easily opened by children, \par
    5. Ensure that the playground is protected from traffic and animals\par
\par
The staff will:\par
   1.  Actively supervise the children during outdoor play time, and will maintain  \par
        required teacher/student ratios at all times.\par
   2.  Pick up debris, such as glass, plastic, paper products, aluminum and any \par
        hazardous conditions before children enter the playground.\par
   3.  Provide availability of drinking water and access to bath room facilities.\par
   4.  Provide and maintain a garbage can for storage fo accumulated trash, rubbish and  \par
        garbage found inside and outside the playground.  \par
   5.  Ensure that the bikes are kept off of the rubber padding\par
\par
\ul MUSCLE ROOM SAFETY:\par
\par
\ulnone To ensure safety for the children while playing in the muscle room, the director and the staff will adhere to the following policies:\par
\par
The director will:\par
    1. Ensure that 65 square feet of space is provided for each child. \par
    2. Ensure that the climbing equipment is free from rust, cracks, holes, \par
       splinter, sharp points or edges, chipped or peeling paint, toxic substances \par
       protruding bolts, or tripping hazards.\par
   The staff will:\par
   1.  Actively supervise the children during indoor play time, and will maintain required  \par
       teacher/student ratios at all times.\par
   2.  Pick up debris, such as glass, plastic, paper products, aluminum and any - \par
        hazardous conditions before children enter the room.\par
   3.  Provide availability of drinking water and access to bath room facilities.\par
 \par
\ul\par
\par
POLICIES TO ENSURE A SAFE CLASSROOM ENVIRONMENT\ulnone :\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx4680\par
The staff will follow specific procedures in order to ensure the safety of the children while they are participating in the classrooms.  Measures to be taken are as follows:\par
 \par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li720\tx720\tx4680 1.\tab All children will be supervised at all times.  \par
2.\tab Director will ensure that the indoor temperature remains above 65 degrees, but does not exceed 85 degrees.\par
3.   Staff will ensure that equipment, materials, and furniture shall be sturdy and safe, easy to clean and maintain, and free from sharp points or corners, splinters, protruding nails, loose or rusty parts, paint which contains lead or other poisonous materials, or other hazardous features.\par
4.   All area used by children shall be ventilated and shall provide protection from rodents, insects and other hazards.\par
5.\tab Staff will ensure that children will be protected from any items and conditions which threaten their health, safety and well being, such as stoves, bodies of water, window covering, pull cords, telephone cords, electrical cords, extension cords, lead hazards, asbestos, wells, traffic, employees\rquote  personal belongings and other environmental hazards.  \par
6.  Staff will make sure that all outlets are covered and remove furniture, equipment and materials which are not usable due to breakage or hazards from the class rooms.\par
7.\tab Staff will make sure that all area rugs have non-skid backing and that the floor surfaces are maintained to prevent injury.  Lawnmowers, power tools and other equipment shall not be used or stored in areas where children may have access to them.\par
8.\tab Staff will make sure that all cleaning supplies are stored in a secure area out of the reach of children.\par
9.\tab Staff will make sure that all toilets are flushed after every use, and ensure that a sturdy platform is available for children who are not able to touch the ground while using the toilet.\par
10.\tab Staff will make sure that all mouth toys are cleaned and disinfected daily; washed and disinfected immediately if soiled with blood, feces, urine, or vomit.\par
11.\tab Staff will not clean with chemicals  and spray aerosils while the children are present.\par
12. Toilet tissue, liquid soap, running water, disposable towels, shall be provided in all restrooms.\par
13. The center will be cleaned daily.  Equipment, furnishings and materials shall be kept clean and in good repair. A chart of cleaning responsibilities is posted on the wall located at the entrance of all classrooms.  \par
\par
\fs22   *   AT NO TIME ARE STAFF AND PARENTS ALLOWED TO SMOKE OR BRING A DEADLY WEAPON OR DANGEROUS ORDNANCE ON THE PRESCHOOL PREMISES.\par
\fs24\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx4680\par
\ul PROCEDURE FOR INCIDENT/INJURY, MEDICAL SITUATIONS\ulnone :\par
\ul\par
\ulnone If any of the situations occur in the list below, the staff will complete the Ohio Department of Job and Family Services  \ldblquote Incident/Injury Report.\rdblquote   The completed report will be given to the parent/guardian on the day of the incident /injury.  If the child requires emergency transportation, the incident/injury report will be available to the parent/guardian within at least twenty-four hours.  Copies of incident/injury reports will be kept on file at the preschool for at least one year.  A copy of all incident/injury reports will be sent to Ohio Department of Job and Family Services in the event of the death of a child,  A child receives a bump or blow to the head that requires first aid or medical attention or An incident, injury or illness requires a child to be removed by the parent or emergency services from the center of medical treatment, professional consultation or transportation for emergency treatment.  If a child is transported for emergency treatment, the health and medical record form shall accompany the child.  The director will also stay with the child until the parent assumes responsiblity for the child's care.  \par
\ul\par
Non-Serious Situations \ulnone\par
\par
1. A child becomes ill and requires first aid or receives an injury which requires first aid treatment.\par
2. A child is transported to a source of emergency assitance.\par
3. A child receives a bump or blow to the head\par
4. An unusual or unexpedted incident occurs which jeopardizes the safety of a child, \par
such as a child leaving the center unattended, or exposure of children to a threatening person or situation.\par
5. Child is coherent and composed immediately after injury or illness.\par
6. Child has a small cut or scrape with little bleeding\par
7. Child has little or no swelling.\par
8. Child is able to move injured area, or does not experience pain when touched.\par
\par
The staff will apply first aid measures such as stopping the bleeding, applying band aid and washing injury with soap and water.  The staff will fill out an incident/injury report, and send a copy home for the parents/guardian to read.  If the injury starts or continues to swell, the teacher will call the parents, notifying them of the situation.  If the injury continues to get worse, the parents will be asked to pick up the child and take him/her to the doctor/hospital.\par
\par
\ul Serious Situations:\par
\ulnone\par
1. Death of a child\par
2. A child receives a bump or blow to the head that requires first aid or medical attention\par
3. An incident, injury or illness requires a child to be removed by the parent or emergency services from the center of medical treatment, professional consultation or transportation for emergency treatment.  If a child is transported for emergency treatment, the health and medical record form shall accompany the child.  The director will also stay with the child until the parent assumes responsiblity for the child's care\par
4. Child is unconscious or non-composed.\par
5. The cut or wound is bleeding excessively after attempts to stop the bleeding by applying pressure\par
6. The child is unable to move injured area or cries when injured area is touched.\par
7. The child\rquote s injury remains swollen 30 minutes after the injury occurred.\par
8. The child displays symptoms of shock (cold, clammy skin, dilated pupils, etc.) without ability to cough, or exhibits signs of panic\par
9. The child is stung by a bee or ingests food that he/she is allergic to and begins to show signs of a reaction to the substance\par
10.The child\rquote s tooth has been knocked loose or completely out, and excessive bleeding occurs.  Teachers are to follow the instructions of the \ldblquote ODH DENTAL FIRST AID CHART\rquote  located on the wall near the classroom entrance.\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\li120\tx4680 After seeing any of these signs, the staff will call 911 immediately while the other teacher administers first aid or C.P.R.  After calling 911, the staff will then call the parents to notify them of the emergency.  If the parents are not reached, the staff will call an emergency contact person.  When the paramedics arrive, the staff members will follow instructions based on the child\rquote s emergency transportation form.  A staff member will accompany the child in the ambulance.  After the child has been taken to the hospital, the staff member will then fill out an incident/injury form, and send a copy home to the parents. Staff members will also complete an incident/injury form for the following situations:\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx4680\ul\par
\par
PROCEDURES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES\ulnone :\par
\par
The Extended care programl has specific procedures in place for the following environmental emergencies:\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\li120\tx4680\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li480\tx480\tx4680 1.\tab Building Emergencies\par
2.\tab Severe Weather Emergencies\par
3.\tab Threats of Violence Emergencies\par
4.    Communicable Disease Outbreak Emergencies\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\li120\tx4680\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx4680 1.Building Emergencies\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx4320\tx4680\ul\par
Fire\ulnone    Fire drills will be conducted every month.  In the event of a fire, staff members are instructed to line the children up and take attendance.  They are to take the children to the Mariemont Elementary School gymnasium and immediately take attendance again to make sure all the children are accounted for.  Parents will then be called to pick-up their child. \par
\ul\par
Utility Problems\ulnone  In the event that problems arise with the electric, heating and cooling, or plumbing systems, the parents will be called, requesting that they pick up their child (pick-up procedures will be observed).  Parents will be notified if the preschool will need to be cancelled for the following days.\par
\par
2.\ul Severe Weather Emergencies\ulnone .  Severe Weather emergency drills will be conducted once a month during the months of April, May, August and September.\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx4680 In the event of severe weather conditions such as tornadoes, thunderstorms, major snowfall, blizzards, ice storms, or earthquakes occure before school begins, parents should use their judgment.  If severe weather occurs while the children are attending school, the teachers will take attendance and lead the children out of the classroom and place them in the main hallway, where the cubbies are located. This area has been approved by the fire department as a safe place for the children to be during severe weather conditions.  Parents will be called and notified to come and pick up their child. \ul In the event of snow, the preschool will be closed if Mariemont City Schools are either delayed or cancelled.\ulnone   Please listen to one of the local radio or television stations for the announcement.  A preschool closing will not be announced separately. \par
\par
3.Threat of Violence  The extended care will conduct quarterly emergency drills.\par
\ul\par
Bomb Threat/Bioterrorism.\ulnone  If the extended care program receives a bomb threat or Bioterrorisum, the teachers will line the children up and take attendance.  They will take the children to the Mariemont Elementary School gymnasium.  Parents or an emergency contact person will be immediately notified once all the children have safely been transported.  Parents are then to come and pick up their child (the pick up procedure will be enacted). \par
\ul\par
Threat of Terror\ulnone   If someone comes to the center with the intent to harm, the director or staff members will call 911.  The teachers quickly do a head count and immediatley lock the class room door, turn off the lights,  gather the kids in a group in the corner of the room and try to keep them as quiet as possible while waiting for the police to arrive.  If an opportunity arrises, police will help evacuate the  teachers and children to the Mariemont Elementary School gymnasium or the Mariemont Preservation Society.  Parents will be called asap as to the location of their child to come and pick up.\par
\par
\ul 4. Communicable Disease Outbreak Emergencies  \ulnone If an epidemic or infectious diesase outbreak occures, we will immediately have parents come and pick up their child.  The center will close for an undetermined amount of time.  Once the threat of the outbreak is rectified, the program will resume.\par
\par
*In the event that we need to evacuate the chidren, we will be going to the Mariemont Elementary School Gymnasium.  Children with special needs will be assisted by our staff members \par
\par
*During an emergency where the children have been evacuated, parents may call the director at 513-504-9287, or call Mariemont Elementary School at 513-272-7400.  If phone lines are busy or not working, parents should just come to the Mariemont Elementary School Guymnasium.  \par
\par
*If the emergency plan is to keep the children in the facility, the emergency kit and all other emergency supplies are located in the staff room.  \par
\par
*Every year, the staff will go over the Emergency plans to ensure saftety for the children.  The Emergency plans will also be updated anually.\par
\par
*In the event of an Emergency, locat emergency officials' phone numbers will be kept on the director's phone for quick contact.\par

\pard\sb100\sa100\cf0\kerning0\b0\f3\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\tx4680\cf1\kerning28\b\f0\par
\cf2\par
}
 